Initial draft of page style guidelines (#204)
EVERSE-ResearchSoftware/RSQKit: pages/contributing/style_guidelines.md

title: Page Style Guidelines
---

In general, we follow the European Commission's [Web Writing Style Guide](https://wikis.ec.europa.eu/display/WEBGUIDE/02.+Web+writing+guidelines) and their more detailed [English Style Guide](https://commission.europa.eu/system/files/2023-11/styleguide_english_dgt_en.pdf). 
Below are the style guidelines specific to the pages in RSQKit (adapted from [RDKkit Style Guide](https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/style_guide)). 

## General style and tone

  * Keep the tone informal and use "you". Imagine you were explaining something verbally to someone - how would you say it?
  * Use short, active sentences and short paragraphs (3-4 sentences).
  * Make use of headings and bullet points to break text up so it is easy to scan.
  * Remember that the site is there to help people, so make it clear to the readers how the information can benefit them.
  * Use the words your readers would use. Think of the terms they would use when searching for their problem, and use those terms.

## Page templates
  
  We provide page templates for certain content types in RSQKit to keep the structure of such pages consistent: 
  

>     * [Task page template](https://github.com/EVERSE-ResearchSoftware/RSQKit/blob/main/pages/your_tasks/TEMPLATE_your_tasks.md)

Author: ```suggestion
* [Task page template](https://github.com/EVERSE-ResearchSoftware/RSQKit/blob/main/pages/your_tasks/TEMPLATE_your_tasks.md)
```

Below are the style guidelines specific to the pages in RSQKit (adapted from [RDKkit Style Guide](https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/style_guide)). 

## General style and tone

* Keep the tone informal and use "you". Imagine you were explaining something verbally to someone - how would you say it?
* Use short, active sentences and short paragraphs (3-4 sentences).
* Make use of headings and bullet points to break text up so it is easy to scan.
* Remember that the site is there to help people, so make it clear to the readers how the information can benefit them.
* Try to make the content concise, avoid repeating things that have been well described and documented elsewhere - instead point out to these external resources.
* Use the words your readers would use. Think of the terms they would use when searching for their problem, and use those terms.

## Page templates
  
We provide page templates for certain content types in RSQKit to keep the structure of such pages consistent. 
If in doubt when creating new content, have a look at other existing content of the same type and try to mimic that.
  

> * [Task page template](https://github.com/EVERSE-ResearchSoftware/RSQKit/blob/main/pages/your_tasks/TEMPLATE_your_tasks.md) for pages addressing common issues or describing commonly performed tasks around reseach software. For an example - see ["How to make a good README" task page](https://everse.software/RSQKit/how_to_make_a_good_readme).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Task page template](https://github.com/EVERSE-ResearchSoftware/RSQKit/blob/main/pages/your_tasks/TEMPLATE_your_tasks.md) for pages addressing common issues or describing commonly performed tasks around research software quality. For an example - see ["How to make a good README" task page](https://everse.software/RSQKit/how_to_make_a_good_readme).
```

  
## Content

* **Acronyms:** spell them out the first time they are mentioned.
* **Ampersands (&):** do not use these in the main text or headings. It is fine to use them in menus if you need to save space for menu items.
* **Capitals:** do not use all capitals for emphasis or in headings (unless it is contained in the name of a resource).
* **Data:** treat it as singular ("data is..."). (Whether "data" is singular or plural is contentious - see the [Wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_(word)) and this [Guardian article](https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2010/jul/16/data-plural-singular).)
* **Dates:** use Wednesday 7 July 2021 (not Wednesday 7th July 2021, or other variations).
* **Datasets:** not "data sets".
* **Email:** not "e-mail".
* **Email addresses:** spell these out and make the email address the link, e.g. [rdm-toolkit@elixir-europe.org](mailto:rdm-toolkit@elixir-europe.org). Do not hide the email address behind a word or phrase like "contact us".
* **Etc.** should be avoided. Try using ‘for example’ or ‘such as’ or ‘including’ at the start of a listing. If etc. is used, put a comma before it if it is in a list, like "A, B, etc.". 

> * **Gender:** avoid using gender-specific words like "he" or "she".

Author: ```suggestion
* **Gender:** avoid using gender-specific words like "he" or "she", use "they" instead.
```

* **Quotations:** use double quotes for quotations and single quotes for quotes within quotes.
* **That/which:** use "that" when you are defining something and "which" when you are adding extra information about it e.g.:
 * "The cat that was on the table suddenly got up" is telling us which cat it was. It is important to the meaning of the sentence because you are not talking about any cat, just the cat on the table.
 * "The cat, which was sitting on the table, suddenly got up" is giving us extra information about the cat. The information is not necessary to understand the sentence. You can remove the clause, and the sentence will still be clear. Clauses starting with "which" usually begin with a comma.
* **Titles (the "title" in the front matter of pages):** only the first word, proper nouns and acronyms are capitalised.
* **Training:** training is an uncountable noun and cannot have a plural. You can write "training courses" and "training materials" but not "trainings".

## Page graphics

  * **White space:** make sure there is plenty of space so that the main elements stand out and the text does not appear overwhelming.

>   * **Colours:** To be decided

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * **Colours:** We recommend for graphs and tables where possible to take into account those who are colour blind. 
```

>   * **Colours:** We recommend for graphs and tables where possible to take into account those who are colour blind. 

Author: ```suggestion
  * **Colours:** The official colours of the EVERSE projects are still to be decided. In the meantime, we recommend to take into account accessibility of those who are colour blind when choosing colours used in graphs and tables. 
```

>   * **Fonts:** Exo 2 is used for headings and main branding font, Open Sans for body text.

Author: ```suggestion
  * **Fonts:** Exo 2 font (licensed under the SIL Open Font License version 1.1) is used for headings and main branding font, Open Sans for body text.
```

>   * **Fonts:** Exo 2 font (licensed under the [SIL Open Font License version 1.1](https://fonts.google.com/specimen/Exo+2)) is used for headings and main branding font, Open Sans for body text.

Author: ```suggestion
  * **Fonts:** [Exo 2 font](https://fonts.google.com/specimen/Exo+2) (licensed under the SIL Open Font License version 1.1) is used for headings and main branding font, Open Sans for body text.
```

>   * **Icons:** the icons used in the data life cycle diagram come from the [Noun Project](https://thenounproject.com/ELIXIRCommunications/kit/rdmkit/). We have a Pro license and the right to publish them without attribution. Other icons on this site are either desgined by Xènia Pérez Sitjà or come from [Font Awesome](https://fontawesome.com/).

Reviewer: I think this needs to be changed - we don't have a pro license on EVERSE - but we don't use the data life cycle diagram - perhaps we can just remove this line

Author: Done.

>   * **Icons:** the icons used in the data life cycle diagram come from the [Noun Project](https://thenounproject.com/ELIXIRCommunications/kit/rdmkit/). We have a Pro license and the right to publish them without attribution. Other icons on this site are either desgined by Xènia Pérez Sitjà or come from [Font Awesome](https://fontawesome.com/).

Author: ```suggestion
  * **Icons:** Icons used by RSQKit are either desigined by [Xènia Pérez Sitjà](https://github.com/sitjart) for [RDMKit](https://github.com/elixir-europe/rdmkit?tab=readme-ov-file#custom-icons) or come from [Font Awesome](https://fontawesome.com/).
```

>   * **Illustrations:** use the colours listed above. The icons we use for illustrations come from the [Noun Project](https://thenounproject.com/ELIXIRCommunications/kit/rdmkit/). Please use these icons in any illustrations. If you need extra icons or any help with illustrations, [open a new issue](https://github.com/elixir-europe/rdmkit/issues) on GitHub or email [rdm-toolkit@elixir-europe.org](mailto:rdm-toolkit@elixir-europe.org).

Author: Yes, we do.

>   * **Illustrations:** Try to use the icons sepcified above in your illustrations, if possible. If you need extra icons or any help with illustrations, [open a new issue](https://github.com/EVERSE-ResearchSoftware/RSQKit/issues) on GitHub or [email us](mailto:rsqkit@lists.certh.gr).

Author: ```suggestion
  * **Illustrations:** Try to use the icons specified above in your illustrations, if possible. If you need extra icons or any help with illustrations, [open a new issue](https://github.com/EVERSE-ResearchSoftware/RSQKit/issues) on GitHub or [email us](mailto:rsqkit@lists.certh.gr).
```

  * **Images:**
    * Do not use images to display text.

>     * Include an 'alt' attribute in images.

Author: ```suggestion
    * Include an 'alt-text' attribute in images to explain what is represented in the image.
```

>   * **Illustrations:** use the colours listed above. The icons we use for illustrations come from the [Noun Project](https://thenounproject.com/ELIXIRCommunications/kit/rdmkit/). Please use these icons in any illustrations. If you need extra icons or any help with illustrations, [open a new issue](https://github.com/elixir-europe/rdmkit/issues) on GitHub or email [rdm-toolkit@elixir-europe.org](mailto:rdm-toolkit@elixir-europe.org).

Author: ```suggestion
  * **Illustrations:** Try to use the icons sepcified above in your illustrations, if possible. If you need extra icons or any help with illustrations, [open a new issue](https://github.com/EVERSE-ResearchSoftware/RSQKit/issues) on GitHub or [email us](mailto:rsqkit@lists.certh.gr).
```
